---
layout: post
title: On data, capta, and the timing of bats
---

Thinking of Johanna Drucker's concepts of [data and capta](http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/1/000091/000091.html), I am reminded that this project says as much or more about my own activities as it does about animal life in my area. A very obvious indication of this is the fact that I saw green crabs and hermit crabs on just two occasions: September 12 and 26, that is on two days I happen to have gone to the ocean. These data points tell us nothing about the activities of marine life; they simply reflect my own movements.

A slightly more complicated example is the case of bats: I had a solitary sighting in May, but most of the days that I saw bats were in August through October. There is one little cluster in August and early September and then another in the middle and end of August. I am sure that there were many bats in my area throughout the summer and fall, but those were the dates when the times that bats are active also correlated with my own activities. I tend to take walks after work, and I also sometimes take walks after dinner. The August and September bat sightings came from my after-dinner walks, during the times when it was just about dusk by the time my husband and I were walking through a park near our house—in fact, all the bats I saw were in this park. Later in September, it became too dark to see bats—and, in any case, we weren't taking as many post-dinner strolls in the dark. Then, as time passed and the days shortened, I started seeing bats again much earlier in the day, as I was coming back through the park near the end of my post-work walk. It's been a few days since I've seen any, with a week of rain and snow, and daylight savings ends tomorrow, so it might next May when I see bats again. Or, since I'm not quite sure when I'll be walking after the time changes, the bats and I might align one more time. 

What's also interesting to me are the animals that are not particularly well represented but are evenly distributed across the months I tracked. For instance, I saw one deer each in the months of April, June, August, and September. I saw one hairy woodpecker each in July, August, September, and October. I saw one osprey each in May, June, and August. I'm not sure what this means exactly, and it's probably just random chance, but these do seem like animals that are both fairly rare and also not particularly active in any part of the season, so I'm also not surprised they happened to have this distribution. Or, it could just be that my own activities line up with theirs consistently but sporadically. 

By contrast, I saw turtles on five occasions, but none later than July, which tracks with my own informal sense that you see turtles mainly in the spring and beginning of the summer. That informal sense proved less reliable when it comes to frogs, which I associate with the spring but which I saw only in August and September (two days each month). Here again, my own movements are the thing really being measured: I saw these frogs primarily during evening walks. Along the same lines, I saw barred owls only in April and May, and only when I was on a particular point in the rail trail around 6pm; I heard them a few times at different points on the trail and later in the summer, but those were the only times I saw the owls (owl? I only ever saw one at a time). I'd been hoping I might see them again in September and October when it started getting dusky around 6pm, but either I just haven't had the luck or the owls frequent that area of the trail in the spring but not the fall. Random chance certainly seems at play with my fox sightings: I saw two foxes this whole summer, just two days apart from each other, in two different locations (one of which was my own backyard!) and with two clearly distinct animals.  

With numbers these low, there's no way to draw any firm conclusions, but I do wonder what I will discover when I have data from more than one year. I might try to track locations as well as total numbers of animals next summer, if I can find a lightweight way to do so. Given how much I've enjoyed examining the results of this very informal and largely impromptu research project, I'm excited at the thought of having more data to play with.  