---
layout: post
title: 2021 preview
---

At the start of this year, I decided to add another layer of information to my data tracking and began recording how many animals I spotted each day. I tried to keep things simple, using almost the same format as I did in the first year, and just putting a small number above each date if I saw more than one of that animal on that date. It was a bit more work because i had to wait until the end of the day to write the totals in my journal (you never know if a rabbit will hop through the yard at 9pm), but the added complexity made things more fun. And, it certainly was more satisfying to know how many rabbits I actually saw! 

It wasn’t just my tracking methods that changed in 2021; my location changed too. In June, we moved from Massachusetts to New Hampshire and that really impacted the animals I saw. Even before the move, we spent much of the year driving between Mass and NH as we looked for a house—and I think the amount of time we spent on the highway is at least partially responsible for an increase in the animal sightings I recorded. 

Here are the animals I saw in 2021 that I hadn’t seen in 2020:
<br/>**Rose-breasted grosbeak:** 1
<br/>**Baltimore oriole:** 1
<br/>**Coyote:** 1
<br/>**Loon:** 1
<br/>**Raccoon:** 1
<br/>**Fisher cats:** 2, on 2 dates
<br/>**Red-bellied woodpeckers:** 2, on 2 dates
<br/>**Egrets:** 6, on 5 dates
<br/>**Cedar waxwings:** 6, on 3 dates
<br/>**Killdeer:** 9, on 6 dates
<br/>**Kingfishers:** 12, on 12 dates
<br/>**Bald eagles:** 13, on 12 dates
<br/>**Snapping turtles:** 14, on 11 dates
<br/>**Seals:** 50, on 6 dates

Several of the above are definitely related to my move: the bald eagles, kingfishers, snapping turtles, cedar waxwings, and killdeer are almost all from along the Exeter River. The seals are all from a week I spent in a dune shack on Cape Cod: the shacks were closed in 2020, but opened again this summer. By contrast, the animals I saw in smaller numbers were more from my old neighborhood in Massachusetts: I saw both fisher cats and the raccoon on the Bruce Freeman Rail Trail, and the coyote and rose-breasted grosbeak were from a couple different hikes in Stow (I’ll confess I don’t remember where I saw the Baltimore oriole—maybe next year I’ll track locations). 

There were also differences in how many animals I saw. Here are the animals I saw a lot more of in 2021 (I’ll just give dates sighted, since I didn’t track individual animals last year): 
<br/>**Muskrats:** 14 sightings in 2021, 2 in 2020
<br/>**Woodchucks:** 10 sightings in 2021, 1 in 2020
<br/>**Turkey vultures:** 55 sightings in 2021, 13 in 2020
<br/>**Turtles:** 29 sightings in 2021, 5 in 2020
<br/>**Herons:** 104 sightings in 2021, 48 in 2020

The herons are definitely because of our move to NH but there are some other factors influencing the differences for most of these animals. I saw so many turtles partly because I started tracking things sooner but also because I was taking a lot of spring hikes on a trail with an active population of turtles (mostly sun turtles)—the same goes for the muskrats. Some woodchucks were from all the highway driving we did and some were from a change in my Massachusetts walk that brought me by a field where one appeared several times.  

What I’m really not sure about is the turkey vultures: it’s not just the highway driving, I also saw many of them in the skies around our neighborhood in Massachusetts. Thirty-three out of 55 sightings were from before the move. Unfortunately, it will be difficult to get truly comparative data, since I don’t have any information on turkey vultures in Massachusetts for early 2020, and in 2022 I’ll have data from New Hampshire instead. 

Even if my informal project isn’t giving me perfectly representative data (and, indeed, quite a lot of the data I’ve wrangled in my DH work has been equally idiosyncratic!), I’m still looking forward to what I'll discover when I review my full set of 2021 sightings.
